#31 Article "Rules are Dangerous" (#154)
Zuehlke/fifty-shades: articles/rules-are-dangerous.md

---
authorName: Rolf Bruderer
authorGithubUsername: bruderol
issue: 31
title: Rules are Dangerous
---
# {{page.title}}

> Rules followed blindly in a dogmatic way do a lot of harm. This is an uncomfortable truth especially for us as engineers. As such we are used to see the world in rigid rules, true and false, if and else. We like to have crystal clear and exact definitions, guidelines or best practices on how to do something. This is not bad in the first place. But we all must be very careful that we do not fall into the trap of just following such rules blindly without thinking well about consequences. 

Author: Thanks for feedback,I dont want to make it longer and do not have time anymore to optimize this. I think a lot of what you are sayng should be implicitly clear out of my intro (written between the lines). 

And: this is not just about collaboration rules!! Not at all! This is about all rules! Often we as technician think that what I say here does not count for very technical rules because technical rules are different, more precise and generally true. but I thnk this is wrong. The same problem as well applies to technical rules. Which is why there are also some technical examplesin the text.

* People read the book about “Clean Code” that says that many code comments can be avoided by writing self-explaining code instead. While this is true for many cases the rule is often miss-used by developers for arguing not to write any comments at all in the source code. But there are many things that you cannot explain by using good method or variable names only. E.g. why you had to implement something like that. For this purpose, good comments are still very valuable and should not be denied. I would say that a well put comment can explain much more than hundred good variable names.

> * The article by Martin Fowler about the “Page Object Pattern” once said to never put assertions into page objects. Someone read that article and wanted to convince the whole project team that it is very important to follow this rule very strictly. The arguments for the rule in the blog post were not very convincing to me. I brought up many examples where breaking that rule caused much more benefit than sticking to it. Nevertheless I was not taken serious. Since Martin Fowler wrote it, it counts as if it was written in the bible. Nobody wanted to constructively argue about it anymore. Fun fact: In the meantime Martin Fowler changed his article to mention both opinions on this topic. This at least let’s the option open to the reader to decide what fits best in his concrete context. Unfortunately, not all famous technical opinion makers are so wise as Mr. Fowler.

Author: Yes, would make a good other article about “cargo cult”. No space for more examples. i had even more I wanted to put in that article (see issue) but its already long enough.

Please, do not get me wrong: I like the Agile Manifesto, the SOLID Principles, Clean Code, Martin Fowler in general and even his article about the Page Object Pattern. Those are all practices I appreciate a lot and that influenced my way of thinking and working. But still all these things also come with the danger of undesired side-effects, if just following them blindly in a dogmatic way.

## The Problems with Rules

The problems I often see in projects with such rules:
* Applying rules in the wrong context might not have the desired effect at all

> * Using rules stricter than meant to be, causes adverse effects

Author: Agree. Can be one of many possible problems. Think this is kind of implicitly given, see also “discussin culture” mentioned later. 

No time / space to squeeze that in. Sorry, too late.

> * Using rules stricter than meant to be, causes adverse effects

Reviewer: No problem, I think the article is fine like that.

---
authorName: Rolf Bruderer
authorGithubUsername: bruderol
issue: 31
title: Rules are Dangerous
---

> # Rules are Dangerous

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# {{page.title}}
```

> Rules followed blindly in a dogmatic way do a lot of harm. This is an uncomfortable truth especially for us as engineers. As such we are used to see the world in rigid rules, true and false, if and else. We like to have crystal clear and exact definitions, guidelines or best practices on how to do something. This is not bad in its first place. But we all must be very careful that we do not fall into the trap of just following such rules blindly without thinking well about consequences. Rules can do more harm than good when they are applied too strict or not as meant to be or in the wrong context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rules followed blindly in a dogmatic way do a lot of harm. This is an uncomfortable truth especially for us as engineers. As such we are used to see the world in rigid rules, true and false, if and else. We like to have crystal clear and exact definitions, guidelines or best practices on how to do something. This is not bad in the first place. But we all must be very careful that we do not fall into the trap of just following such rules blindly without thinking well about consequences. 
```

## Examples of Rules from Software Projects

> Here are some famous examples of rules in Software Engineering that I have seen to cause troubles in projects:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here are some examples of rules in Software Engineering that I have seen to cause troubles in projects:
```

* People read the book about “Clean Code” that says that many code comments can be avoided by writing self-explaining code instead. While this is true for many cases the rule is often miss-used by developers for arguing not to write any comments at all in the source code. But there are many things that you cannot explain by using good method or variable names only. E.g. why you had to implement something like that. For this purpose, good comments are still very valuable and should not be denied. I would say that a well put comment can explain much more than hundred good variable names.

> * The article by Martin Fowler about the “Page Object Pattern” once said to never put assertions into page objects. Someone read that article and wanted to convince the whole project team that it is very important to follow this rule very strictly. The arguments for the rule in the blog post were not very convincing to me and the benefit of it is at least very questionable for most applications of that pattern I have seen. But since Martin Fowler wrote this rule in his article, it counts as if it was written in the bible. This makes it difficult to argue and discuss constructively about it. No matter how many good examples you bring up in your context of application where the rule causes more troubles than bringing benefits, you will not be taken seriously. Such dogmatic discussions about such rules can cause you to lose valuable time and energy. A rule without good justification why it is so important and in what context, is not really a useful rule. No matter how famous and clever that person is who wrote it. Funny side note: in the meantime, the article by Fowler has been changed to mention both opinions on this topic and lets the option open to the reader to decide what fits best in his concrete context. Unfortunately, not all famous technical opinion makers are so wise as Mr. Fowler.

Author: ```suggestion
* The article by Martin Fowler about the “Page Object Pattern” once said to never put assertions into page objects. Someone read that article and wanted to convince the whole project team that it is very important to follow this rule very strictly. The arguments for the rule in the blog post were not very convincing to me. I brought up many examples where breaking that rule caused much more benefit than sticking to it. Nevertheless I was not taken serious. Since Martin Fowler wrote it, it counts as if it was written in the bible. Nobody wanted to constructively argue about it anymore. Fun fact: In the meantime Martin Fowler changed his article to mention both opinions on this topic. This at least let’s the option open to the reader to decide what fits best in his concrete context. Unfortunately, not all famous technical opinion makers are so wise as Mr. Fowler.
```

Author: @abeggchr here is my proposal for improving and shortening this 4th example. What do you think? Ok?

Reviewer 2: Ok

> * The article by Martin Fowler about the “Page Object Pattern” once said to never put assertions into page objects. Someone read that article and wanted to convince the whole project team that it is very important to follow this rule very strictly. The arguments for the rule in the blog post were not very convincing to me and the benefit of it is at least very questionable for most applications of that pattern I have seen. But since Martin Fowler wrote this rule in his article, it counts as if it was written in the bible. This makes it difficult to argue and discuss constructively about it. No matter how many good examples you bring up in your context of application where the rule causes more troubles than bringing benefits, you will not be taken seriously. Such dogmatic discussions about such rules can cause you to lose valuable time and energy. A rule without good justification why it is so important and in what context, is not really a useful rule. No matter how famous and clever that person is who wrote it. Funny side note: in the meantime, the article by Fowler has been changed to mention both opinions on this topic and lets the option open to the reader to decide what fits best in his concrete context. Unfortunately, not all famous technical opinion makers are so wise as Mr. Fowler.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The article by Martin Fowler about the “Page Object Pattern” once said to never put assertions into page objects. Someone read that article and wanted to convince the whole project team that it is very important to follow this rule very strictly. The arguments for the rule in the blog post were not very convincing to me. But since Martin Fowler wrote it, it counts as if it was written in the bible. This makes it difficult to argue and discuss constructively about it. 

Such dogmatic discussions about such rules can cause you to lose valuable time and energy. A rule without good justification why it is so important and in what context, is not really a useful rule. No matter how famous and clever that person is who wrote it. 
```

Author: Ok, I see this has to be shortened for sure. I will maybe do it slightly different.

Author: Ich mach das noch - allerdings ein wenig anders. Bin mit der Kürzung nicht ganz zufrieden. Finde hier ist etwas gar viel rausgerutscht. Z.B. wär mir hier noch wichtig zu erwähnen, dass zumindest Fowler diesbezüglich den Artikel mittlerweile verbessert hat.
Auch find ich komisch dass ein Teil jetzt aus dem letzten Beispiel rausgerutscht ist, Absicht?

Author: Siehe anderer Vorschlag von mir

Author: wie besprochen durch meinen anderen Vorschlag entsprechend gelöst.

> Please, do not get me wrong: I like the Agile Manifesto, the SOLID Principles, Clean Code, Martin Fowler in general and even his article about the Page Object Pattern. Those are all practices I appreciate a lot and that influenced my way of thinking and working. But still all these things also come with the danger of undesired side-effects, if just following them stupidly or in a very dogmatic way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please, do not get me wrong: I like the Agile Manifesto, the SOLID Principles, Clean Code, Martin Fowler in general and even his article about the Page Object Pattern. Those are all practices I appreciate a lot and that influenced my way of thinking and working. But still all these things also come with the danger of undesired side-effects, if just following them blindly in a dogmatic way.
```

## The Problems with Rules

The problems I often see in projects with such rules:
* Applying rules in the wrong context might not have the desired effect at all
* Using rules stricter than meant to be, causes adverse effects
* Applying rules without really understanding them can result in more harm to the project than benefits

> * Some rules might be treated as god given, just because it has been defined in some famous article by some clever guy or in that holy Scrum bible or the process manual written by the higher management. This causes that people will not argue about these rules anymore about why, when and how some rules should be followed exactly. This can cause destructive discussion culture and lead to bad decisions without real arguments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Treating rules as god given, causes people not to reason about these rules anymore. This can cause a destructive discussion culture and lead to bad decisions without real arguments.
```

Author: @abeggchr awesome - grossartig wie du das knackiger gemacht hast! Sehr cool getroffen! Danke!

## Conclusion and Recommendations

Here are my recommendations on how to mitigate the problems with such rules in your projects:

* We all must be always willing to explain ourselves, why we do something like that and what are the arguments to apply a rule in which context. Something like “just because our process manual says so” or “because I’ve read it in that article” is usually not a good answer.
* Don’t try to replace critical thinking and adaptive methods by exact and rigid rules that people must follow strictly. 

> * But do not read my recommendations here in a dogmatic way. Which would be: “Rolf said rules are bad and harmful, so let’s trash all our rules in our project and don’t follow the scrum guide, our Definition of Done, Clean Code and similar things anymore”. This was not my message at all! 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Do not read my recommendations here in a dogmatic way. Which would be: “Rolf said rules are bad and harmful, so let’s trash all our rules in our project and don’t follow the scrum guide, our Definition of Done, Clean Code and similar things anymore”. This was not my message at all! 
```

* Instead: Discuss, write down and live these rules in your Team, but see it more as a guide than exact rules to be 100% precisely followed in any case.
* Note down not just the rules you use in your project but also the arguments why a rule should be applied. 
* Be open to discuss and reexplain rules in your projects with your team members and to adjust the rules to changes in the context (e.g. growing software, growing team, shorter release cycles, different team members, new ideas, etc.)
* Be critical to existing rules, but also respect and try to understand them in a first place.

> Also remember this when reading all the other articles in this book from my brilliant coworkers! 

Reviewer 2: Ich würde die zwei Sätze ganz weglassen.

Author: Du meinst den Hinweis auf die anderen Artikel?? Oder welche zwei Sätze?? Die Idee war ja mal ursprünglich im yammer thread als ich diesen artikel vorgeschlagen hatte, diesen artikel als den ersten artikel zu verwenden mit dem Hinweis dass alle Ideen im Buch eben nicht dogmatisch auszulegen sind. Das war nicht meine Idee, sondern wurde von sonst jemandem als kommentar vorgeschlagen, müsste ich im Yammer nachschauen, und ich fand das noch ne coole Idee. Kann’s aber auch rausnehmen, wenn Du’s eher unpassend oder doof findest??

Author: Ich hätte aber schon gern ein Schlusswort im Artikel um den Leser mit einer Schlussmessage zu entlassen. Der Hinweis ist ja nicht bloss auf die Artikel im Buch gemeint, sondern eigentlich bezohen auf so ziemlich alle Artikel die in der grossen Weiten Welt (WWW) so rumschwirren ;-)

Reviewer 2: "die zwei Sätze" = ja, dein Schlusswort mit dem starken Bezug zur Artikelsammlung. Der Ansatz "Der Hinweis ist ja nicht bloss auf die Artikel im Buch gemeint, sondern eigentlich bezogen auf so ziemlich alle Artikel die in der grossen Weiten Welt (WWW) so rumschwirren ;-)" finde ich passender. Und ja, ein Schlusswort wäre schon wichtig, das ist mir nicht aufgefallen bei meinem Weglassvorschlag. Aber eben: ich würde ihn nicht so stark auf diese Artikelsammlung beschränken.

Author: Ok, kann ich entsprechend noch anpassen, werde mir den hinweis auf die artikel im buch aber trotzdem nicht ganz verkneifen, wenn’s ok ist?

Author: Hab die Conclusion angepasst. Hoffe es passt nun so??

There are many great rules and ideas in these articles that will help you a lot when applied wisely in the right context.

> ## Further Readings

Reviewer 2: Bitte Kapitel Further Readings in neues File "rules-are-dangerous.resources.md" verschieben und am Schluss des Artikels folgendermassen verlinken: 

{% include "./rules-are-dangerous.resources.md" %}

Author: Kann ich tun, auch wenn mir der Sinn dieser Stückelung mit den Includes nicht ganz klar ist.

Funktioniert das mit der Stückelung und den includes tatsächlich mit dem gitbook Tooling?

Interessant.

Author: Done
